
# Dynamic problem

## Value function
$$V(s_{t})=\max_{a_t\in A}\left\{ U(a_t, s_{t})+\beta\int V(s_{t+1}|a_t,s_{t})ds_{t+1}\right\} $$
$$ V(s_{t})=\max_{a_t\in A}\left\{ v(a_t,s_{t})\right\} $$

In our context, the agent $i$ chooses the optimal action $a_t$ that maximizes the utilty function $v(a_t,s_{t})$ given the state $s_{t}$. But he or she has uncertainties about the future state $s_{t+1}$.

Now we specify the form of $v(a_t, s_{t})$ which consists of two parts. One is the current utility and the other is the continuation value.
$$ v(a_t, s_{t})=U(a_t, s_{t})+\beta\int V(s_{t+1}|a_t,s_{t})ds_{t+1}$$ 

### Current value
The **current value** is 
$$ U(a_t, s_{t})=u(a_t,x_t)+\epsilon_{t} $$

### Continuation value
The **continuation value** is 
$$ \int V(s_{t+1}|a_t,s_{t})ds_{t+1}=\int \max_{a_{t+1}\in A}\left\{ v(a_{t+1},s_{t+1})\right\}ds_{t+1}$$
$$  =\int{V_{t+1}(s_{t+1})}f(s_{t+1}|a_t,s_{t})ds_{t+1}$$

We need to assume that the state $s_{t+1}|a_t,s_{t}$ follows a certain distribution. 
$$ f(s_{t+1}|a_t,s_{t}) = f(x_{t+1},\epsilon_{t+1}|a_t,x_t,\epsilon_t)=f(x_{t+1}|x_t,a_t,\epsilon_t) g(\epsilon_{t+1}|x_t,a_t,\epsilon_t) = f(x_{t+1}|x_t,a_t) g(\epsilon_{t+1})$$
Then we have the continuation value as
$$ \int{V_{t+1}(s_{t+1})}f(s_{t+1}|a_t,s_{t})ds_{t+1} = \int V_{t+1}(s_{t+1})f(x_{t+1}|x_t,a_t) g(\epsilon_{t+1})d\epsilon_{t+1}dx_{t+1}$$ 

## Intermediate value function
We define as the intermediate value function as the expectation of value function w.r.t. the $\epsilon_{t}$.
$$\bar{V}(x_{t})=\int V_{t}(x_{t},\epsilon_t)g(\epsilon_t)d\epsilon_t$$

Therefore, we can rewrite the original value function as 
$$V(s_{t})=\max_{a_t\in A} v(a_t, s_{t})$$
$$=\max_{a_t\in A} u(a_t,x_t)+\epsilon_{t}+\beta\int \bar{V}_{t+1}(x_{t+1})f(x_{t+1}|x_t,a_t)dx_{t+1}$$
$$ = \max_{a_t\in A} \tilde{u}(a_t,x_t)+\epsilon_{t}$$

If we had known the continuation value given the current state $x_{t}$, then we know the $\tilde{u}(a_t,x_t)$. Then,
- If we also know the current $\epsilon_{t}$, then
the value function $V_{t}(s_{t})$ is directly found.
- If we don't know the current $\epsilon_t$, the intermediate value function can be found by the logsum formula
$$\bar{V}(x_{t})=\gamma+ \ln \sum_{a_t\in A} \exp\left\{ \tilde{u}(x_t,a_t)\right\}$$

The next section presents the static case.

## Parameter estimation
1. For each parameter vector $\theta$, we can derive the (intermediate) value function and the policy function as previously shown. (Inner step)
2. Then we want to find the best parameter vector $\theta$ that fits what we observe in the data. (Outer step)

# Static problem

Recall that in the discrete choice problem.
- if we had known the current state $s_t=(x_t,\epsilon_t)$, the value function will be
$$V(x_t,\epsilon_t)=\max_a v(s_{t},a_{t})=\max_a u(x_t,a_t)+\epsilon_{t}$$
- However, if we only know $x_t$,  the intermediate value function is
$$\bar{V}(x_t)=\int V(x_t,\epsilon_t)g(\epsilon_t)d\epsilon_t$$ 
$$ \bar{V}(x_t)=\gamma+ \ln \sum_{a_t\in A} \exp\left\{ u(x_t,a_t)\right\}$$ 
if assuming the $\epsilon_t$ follows the EVT1 distribution.

(Wait, how do we come up with this logsum expression?)


# Example: Rust bus engine replacement problem

## Static setup 

The setup is as follows:
- Each $i$ is a bus. 
- The decision $a_t$ is whether to replace the engine or not.
- The state $s_{t}=(x_t,\epsilon_t)$ is the mileage of the engine and the shock. 
- The utility/profit function takes the following form
$$ u(a_t,x_t)=y_t(a_t,x_t,\epsilon_t)-rc(a_t,x_t)$$ 
where $y_t$ is the maintenance cost and $c_t$ is the replacement cost.
  
We put some structure on the costs: 
$$ y_t(a_t,x_t,\epsilon_t)=-c((1-a_t)x_t,\epsilon_t) $$
$$ rc_t(a_t,x_t)=a_t(\theta_0+\theta_1x_t)$$
Then the profit function can be written as
$$ \pi(a_t,x_t,\epsilon_t)=\begin{cases} -c(0,\epsilon_t)-(\theta_0+\theta_1x_t) & \text{if } a_t=1 \\ -c(x_t,\epsilon_t) & \text{if } a_t=0 \end{cases}$$

We assume additive separaability of the maintenance cost $y_t= (1-a_t)(\theta_{c0}+\theta_{c1}x_t)+\epsilon_t$.

The profit function is in the following linear form 
$$ \pi(a_t,x_t,\epsilon_t)=\begin{cases} -(\theta_{r0}+\theta_{r1}x_t)+\epsilon_t & \text{if } a_t=1 \\ -(\theta_{c0}+\theta_{c1}x_t)+\epsilon_t & \text{if } a_t=0 \end{cases}$$

Therefore, the parameter to estimate (and can identify) in the static setup is $\theta_{s}=(\theta_{c0}-\theta_{r0},\theta_{c1}-\theta_{r1})$.

The discount factor is $\beta$ and can not be identified here. 

## Dynamic setup

We discretize the mileage $x_t$ into $N$ bins. The value function is
$$ V(x_t,\epsilon_t)=\max_a \left\{ \pi(a_t,x_t,\epsilon_t)+\beta \int \bar{V}(x_{t+1})f(x_{t+1}|x_t,a_t)dx_{t+1}\right\}$$
$$ = \max_a \left\{ \pi(a_t,x_t,\epsilon_t)+\beta \sum_{x_{t+1}} \bar{V}(x_{t+1})f(x_{t+1}|x_t,a_t)\right\}$$


Therefore, in addition to the static parameters $\theta$, we need to estimate the transition matrix $f(x_{t+1}|x_t,a_t)$.
We **impose** the following structure on the evolution of $x_t$ (transition probability):
$$f(x_{t+1}|x_t,a_t)=\begin{cases} \theta_t \exp(\theta_t x_{t+1}) & \text{if } a_t=1\\\theta_t \exp(\theta_t(x_{t+1}-x_t)) & \text{if } a_t=0   \end{cases}$$

Therefore, in total, we have three parameters to estimate: $\theta=(\theta_{c0}-\theta_{r0},\theta_{c1}-\theta_{r1},\theta_t)$.


Then we apply MLE to estimate the parameters.




